---
title: Swift News Agency
points: 10
---

A translator at the *Swift News* agency, which regularly receives lots of material in English,
tries to work as fast and efficiently as possible, and therefore first translates titles of articles
and only then some of the articles. Because of this technique, however, some of the titles do
not correspond to the contents of the translated articles and have to be reconsidered. This
happened to three of the articles whose titles are given below. 

1. Budget Cut Threatens Railway
Modernization Project Funding.
2. Cold Winter Threatens Start of
Shipping Season in Small Lakes.
3. Insanitariness in Brobdingnag
Threatens Cholera Outbreak.
4. New Crisis in Blefuscu Threatens
Collapse of Peace Talks.
5. Password Leak From Megasoft
Threatens Mass Piracy.
6. Population Crisis in Lilliput
Threatens Tax Reform.
7. Sudden Weather Change Threatens
Arrival of Reinforcements to
Besieged City.
8. Suspension of Talks Threatens Peace
Process in Lilliput and Blefuscu.
9. Unexpected Event in Country of
Houyhnhnms Threatens Early
Elections.
10. Terrorists Activity Threatens Public
Security.
11. Global Cooling Threatens Food
Shortages.

**Assignment.** Indicate which titles did not correspond to the contents of the articles after
translations. Give the appropriate translations. Explain your solution. 

> :expl

**Note.** Knowledge of English is NOT NECESSARY for the solution of the problem. Lilliput,
Blefuscu, Brobdingnag and Country of Houyhnhnms are imaginary countries, featured in the
writings by Jonathan Swift, an English writer (1667–1745).