---
title: mRNA Sequencing
points: 20
tags: comp mrna bio
---

One of the major achievements in genetics was the decipherment
of the genetic code—the creation of an mRNA–polypeptide dictionary. Polypeptides (proteins)
are building blocks of all living organisms. Polypeptide molecules are chains that consist of
amino acids (denoted as *Arg*, *Leu*, *Phe* etc.), and it is the sequence of amino acids in the
polypeptide that determines its properties. When cells synthesize polypeptides, they follow
instructions written in molecules of messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA), chains that consist
of four nucleotides (denoted as `U`, `C`, `A`, `G`).

If a cell uses as a template the following mRNA sequence:

:::div{.lmargin2}
```
AUGUCGAGAAGUCACACCCCACCUUCCGAAUCUAGCCUCAAGAAUCUAGCUCGUGGCCGGAUCUAUACACGAU
GAAUGAGGUGGUGUCUUGUGUGCGAGUUAUUCUAAAUGAACCGCUAGAUGGGUCAUGCGCCGGACGUAGGAUU
GUUUCAGGCACCCACUAUUCUGUACGUCCAAAUAGAUAAAGUUGCCUCA,
```
:::

the following polypeptides will be synthesized:
- *Met-Ser-Arg-Ser-His-Thr-Pro-Pro-Ser-Glu-Ser-Ser-Leu-Lys-Asn-Leu-Ala-Arg-Gly-Arg-IleTyr-Thr-Arg*
- *Met-Arg-Trp-Cys-Leu-Val-Cys-Glu-Leu-Phe*
- *Met-Asn-Arg*
- *Met-Gly-His-Ala-Pro-Asp-Val-Gly-Leu-Phe-Gln-Ala-Pro-Thr-Ile-Leu-Tyr-Val-Gln-Ile-AspLys-Val-Ala-Ser*

***(a)*** A cell uses the following mRNA sequence:
:::div{.lmargin2}
```
AUGUUAACGUUCUAAAUGUGGGGGGGACACCAG
```
:::
What polypeptide(s) will it synthesize?

***(b)*** A cell synthesized the following polypeptide:
:::div{.lmargin2}
:div[*Met-Lys-Cys-Ile*]{.lmargin2}

What mRNA sequence(s) could it have used?
:::
***(c)*** The nucleotide pairs are sometimes called roots and classified into two groups: strong
roots and weak roots. Examples of strong roots are `CU`, `GU`, `AC`, `GG`. Examples of weak
roots are `AU`, `UA`, `UG`, `AA`. Classify all the other roots.

**Note.** The data presented here are slightly simplified.
:i[—Alexander Berdichevsky]{.right}