---
title: Ktunaxa
points: 20
tags:
- ktunaxa
- match 
---

Here are some words and phrases in Ktunaxa and their English
translations in random order:

:::table{.border-hidden .width-800 .center .padding-none .mb2}
::tr[:td[**ʔa·kǂu**] :td[*young white-tailed deer*]]
::tr[:td[**ʔa·kǂaḿnam**] :td[*bone*]]
::tr[:td[**ʔa·kiǂmiyit**] :td[*bad weather*]]
::tr[:td[**ʔa·kiǂwi·nam**] :td[*snow*]]
::tr[:td[**ʔa·knuqǂuǂaḿ**] :td[*it is angry again*]]
::tr[:td[**ʔa·kwum**] :td[*Little Strong Belly*]]
::tr[:td[**ʔa·qǂa**] :td[*someone's heart*]]
::tr[:td[**ʔa·qatnananam**] :td[*stomach*]]
::tr[:td[**¢maḱwumnana**] :td[*inside (noun)*]]
::tr[:td[**ǂa**] :td[sukiǂmiyitni * it is blind*]]
::tr[:td[**ǂa**] :td[saniǂwi·ni * Piegans*]]
::tr[:td[**ǂitǂiǂni**] :td[*American eagle*]]
::tr[:td[**kamnuqǂuqatnana**] :td[*someone's short tail*]]
::tr[:td[**maḱ**] :td[*it is sunny again*]]
::tr[:td[**maḱnana**] :td[*someone's head*]]
::tr[:td[**sanǂa**] :td[*token (for a game)*]]
::tr[:td[**saniǂmiyit**] :td[*sky*]]
:::

You may ignore the prefix **ʔa·k** and its variants **ʔa·** and **ʔa·q** in this problem. Its exact
function is not yet understood, but it is known that it does not contribute to the word meaning.
You will not be graded on whether you include or omit the **ʔa·**, **ʔa·k**, or **ʔa·q** prefix.

**(a)** Determine the correct correspondences, given that **ǂit¢maḱqa·ni** means it is weak.

**(b)** What are the two meanings of **ǂa**?

**(c)** Translate literally into English:

:::table{.border-hidden .no1Count .no2Count .width-800 .m2n2}
::tr[:td[18. **ʔa·qatwumǂa**] :td[*dress (noun)*] :td[:ans{.sm}]]
::tr[:td[19. **ǂaǂitǂu**] :td[*spring season*] :td[:ans{.sm}]]
:::

**(d)** Translate into English:

:::table{.border-hidden .no1Count .no2Count .width-800 .m2n2}
::tr[:td[20. **ǂitqatni**] :td[:ans{.med}]] 
::tr[:td[21. **ʔa·kiǂwi·nana**] :td[:ans{.med}]]
:::

**(e)** Translate into Ktunaxa:

:::table{.border-hidden .no1Count .no2Count .width-800 .m2n2}
::tr[:td[22. *someone’s good stomach*] :td[:ans{.med}]]
::tr[:td[23. *eye*] :td[:ans{.med}]]
:::

**Note.** Ktunaxa is a Native American language isolate spoken by fewer than 100 people in Idaho
and Montana, USA, and British Columbia, Canada.
<br>ʔ, ǂ, ¢, ḱ and ḿ are consonants. The mark · prolongs the preceding vowel.
<br>The American eagle is a large native bird of prey with white feathers on its head and brown
feathers on its body. Little Strong Belly is a person’s name. The Piegans are an enemy tribe that
obtained its first horses from the Ktunaxa before relations soured. Tokens are playing pieces
made out of bone, wood, or stone, used in various (board) games. :i[— Jerome Jochems ]{.right}