---
title: Inanwatan
points: 20
tags:
- inanwatan
- rosetta
---

Here are some sentences in Inanwatan and their English translations:

:::table{.no1Count .no2Count .padding-none .border-hidden .width-1200 .center}
::tr[:td[1. **Idabe meqebi.**<br>*The hawk speaks.*] :td[7. **Ato ewai buqaritawodawo.**<br>*This mouse belongs to the writer(f).*]]
::tr[:td[2. **Murowo nasabi.**<br>*He will cry in the river.*] :td[8. **Qibiro aga qido meriqaqabe.**<br>*The tortoise’s mother bites us.*]]
::tr[:td[3. **Qotoqoware nesabi.**<br>*His son will sleep.*] :td[9. **Qeqake osoi buquro meqaqabi.**<br>*That cockatoo bites the taro.*]]
::tr[:td[4. **Buquro obosabe.**<br>*She will hit the taro.*] :td[10. **Ewaidaga medo aga qide meseebi.**<br>*This snake’s father cuts him.*]]
::tr[:td[5. **Bidora meraqaqabi.**<br>*He bites me for the sow.*] :td[11. **Uto aga qidera naqaqasabi.**<br>*He will bite me for the fish’s father.*]]
::tr[:td[6. **Maroqo moootebe.**<br>*His sister becomes ill.*] :td[12. **Peraqote aga maroqo merabe.**<br>*The devil’s sister cries.*]]
:::
:::table{.no1Count .no2Count .padding-none .border-hidden .width-1200 .center .mb2}
::tr[:td[13. **Naqido aga medo noosabe.**<br>*My mother’s snake will fall.*]]
::tr[:td[14. **Idabe esai buqaritawo aga qotoqowaredaso.**<br>*This hawk belongs to the writer(f)’s son.*]]
::tr[:td[15. **Qido naqotoqoware aga meqarowo obosabe.**<br>*His mother will hit him in my son’s house.*]]
::tr[:td[16. **Qeqake aga qotoqoware qido aga medora meriobobi.**<br>*The cockatoo’s son hits us for his mother’s snake.*]]
::tr[:td[17. **Taragaro ewai owoidaga mesidao aga bide aga qidodawo.**<br>*This lake belongs to that woman’s boar’s mother.*]]
:::


**(a)** Translate into English:

:::table{.border-hidden .no1Count .no2Count .width-1200 .m2n2}
::tr[:td[18. **Meqaro ewai naqidedawo.**] :td[:ans{.med}]]
::tr[:td[19. **Ato ewaidaga utora qesabe.**] :td[:ans{.med}]]
::tr[:td[20. **Niqido aga bide moobobi.**] :td[:ans{.med}]]
::tr[:td[21. **Idabe osoidaga peraqote aga meqarowo meroobi.**] :td[:ans{.med}]]
:::

One of the sentences has two possible translations. Provide them both.

**(b)** Translate into Inanwatan:

:::table{.border-hidden .no1Count .no2Count .width-1200 .m2n2}
::tr[:td[22. *The sow sleeps.*] :td[:ans{.med}]]
::tr[:td[23. *That devil will hit us for our daughter.*] :td[:ans{.med}]]
::tr[:td[24. *That taro belongs to his brother.*] :td[:ans{.med}]]
::tr[:td[25. *This man’s father hits him in that river.*] :td[:ans{.med}]]
::tr[:td[26. *The writer(m)’s tortoise cuts me in the lake.*] :td[:ans{.med}]]
:::

**Note.** Inanwatan belongs to the South Bird’s Head group of the Trans-New Guinea family. It is
spoken by approx. 800 people in the Southwest Papua province, Indonesia.
<br>The subscripts (M) and (F) refer to masculine and feminine gender, respectively.
<br>A boar and a sow represent a male and a female pig, respectively. A cockatoo is a kind of
bird. A taro is a plant. :i[— Kazune Sato ]{.right}