---
title: Walman
points: 20
tags:
- walman 
- rosetta
---

Here are some sentences in Walman and their possible English
translations:

:::table{.border-hidden .padding-none .no2Count .width-1200}
::tr[:td[***Runon nchklwaro chim.***] :td[*He deceived you (pl).*]]
::tr[:td[***Ri ypa kaypu wuel.***] :td[*They and I killed the pigs.*]]
::tr[:td[***Chuto wpa ketiki wuel.***] :td[*The woman and I cooked the pig (f ).*]]
::tr[:td[***Ru wklwaroy nyue waroy muen.***] :td[*She deceived the mother and the brothers.*]]
::tr[:td[***Ru weytiki wuel laroy ngolu.***] :td[*She cooked the piglet and the cassowaries.*]]
::tr[:td[***Chi npaltawro kum.***] :td[*You (sg) looked for me.*]]
::tr[:td[***Mue waron muen ypaltawro kipin.***] :td[*The sister and the brother looked for us.*]]
::tr[:td[***Muen ncha chentiki ngolu.***] :td[*The brother and you (sg) cooked the cassowary (m).*]]
::tr[:td[***Runon naron yeteren muen.***] :td[*They two (m) saw the brother.*]]
::tr[:td[***Kum maro chu kaltawro pelen.***] :td[*I and the wife looked for the dog (f ).*]]
::tr[:td[***Kum meterey pelen laron wuel.***] :td[*I saw the puppy and the pig (m).*]]
::tr[:td[***Ngan naron na yanpu pelen.***] :td[*The father and the son killed the dog (m).*]]
::tr[:td[***Nyue wchaltawro chi.***] :td[*The mother looked for you (sg).*]]
::tr[:td[***Chim charo chklwaro ru.***] :td[*You (pl) and she deceived her.*]]
::tr[:td[***Ri ypapu kipin.***] :td[*They killed us.*]]
:::

**(a)** Translate into English in all possible ways:

:::table{.border-hidden .no1Count .no2Count .width-1200}
::tr[:td[16. **Ru waro ypapu kum.**] :td[:ans{.med}]]
::tr[:td[17. **Na ycha chaltawro chu.**] :td[:ans{.med}]]
::tr[:td[18. **Chi npa kaltawroy chu.**] :td[:ans{.med}]]
::tr[:td[19. **Kum meltiki ngolu.**] :td[:ans{.med}]]
::tr[:td[20. **Kipin karon ngan kanpu wuel.**] :td[:ans{.med}]]
:::

**(b)** Translate into Walman:

:::table{.border-hidden .no1Count .no2Count .width-1200}
::tr[:td[21. *You (sg) and he killed the cassowary (f ).*] :td[:ans{.med}]]
::tr[:td[22. *The piglet saw them two (m + f ).*] :td[:ans{.med}]]
::tr[:td[23. *The father looked for me and the puppy.*] :td[:ans{.med}]]
::tr[:td[24. *The sons and she killed you (sg).*] :td[:ans{.med}]]
::tr[:td[25. *I and you (pl) cooked the piglet.*] :td[:ans{.med}]]
:::

**Note.** Walman belongs to the Torricelli family. It is spoken by approx. 1,700 people in Papua
New Guinea.
<br>***w***, ***y*** and ***ch*** are consonants.
A cassowary is a flightless bird native to the tropical forests of New Guinea and northeastern
Australia.
<br>*f* = feminine, *m* = masculine, *sg* = singular, *pl* = plural. :i[—Samuel Ahmed]{.right}