---
title: Ik 
points: 20
tags:
- ik 
- number
---

The following are the fourth powers of natural numbers in ascending
order:

:div[1, 16, 81, 256, 625, 1296, 2401, 4096, 6561, 10000,...]{.center}

The first ten entries of this sequence are spelt out in Ik, in arbitrary order:

:::div{.lmargin2}
a. **ŋamɪá leɓetse ńda tomínékwa túde ńda ʝɪrɪnɪ túde ńda kɪɗɪ kɔn**
<br>b. **álifika tsʼaɡúsé ńda tomínékwa túde ńda kiɗi tsʼaɡúsé ńda ʝɪrɪnɪ túde ńda kɪɗɪ kɔn**
<br>c. **álifika túde ńda kɪɗɪ kɔn ńda ŋamɪá túde ńda tomínékwa túde ńda kɪɗɪ kɔn ńda nɛ́bɛɛ kɔn**
<br>d. **álifika tomín**
<br>e. **álifa kɔn ńda ŋamɪá leɓetse ńda tomínékwa túde ńda kiɗi tsʼaɡúsé ńda ʝɪrɪnɪ túde ńda kɪɗɪ kɔn**
<br>f. **tomínékwa túde ńda kiɗi aɗe ńda nɛ́bɛɛ kɔn**
<br>g. **tomíní ńda ʝɪrɪnɪ túde ńda kɪɗɪ kɔn**
<br>h. **kɔn**
<br>i. **álifika leɓetse ńda ŋamɪá tsʼaɡúsé ńda kɔn**
<br>j. **ŋamɪá túde ńda kɪɗɪ kɔn ńda tomínékwa leɓetse ńda ʝɪrɪnɪ túd**
:::

**(a)** Determine the correct correspondence.

**(b)** Write in numerals:

:::table{.no1Count .no2Count .border-hidden .width-600}
::tr[:td[k. álifika tomíní ńda ʝɪrɪnɪ leɓets] :td[:ans]]
::tr[:td[l. tomínékwa túde ńda kɪɗɪ kɔn] :td[:ans]]
::tr[:td[m. tomínékwa túde ńda nɛ́bɛɛ kɔn] :td[:ans]]
::tr[:td[n. álifika ŋamɪá kɔn] :td[:ans]]
:::

**(c)** Write out in Ik: 3108.

**(d)** Write out the eleventh entry of the sequence in Ik.

**Note.** Ik belongs to the Nilo-Saharan family. It is spoken by approx. 7,500 people in Uganda.
<br>**ɓ**, **ɗ**, **ʝ**, **ŋ** and **tsʼ** are consonants. **ɔ**, **ɛ** and **ɪ** are pronounced like **o**, **e** and **i**, respectively,
but with the slightly lowered tongue. The mark **'** denotes a high tone.
<br>The fourth power of a number $n$ is the result of multiplying four instances of $n$ together.
($n^4 = n \cdot n \cdot n \cdot n$) :i[—Minkyu Kim]{.right}