---
title: Hdi
points: 20
tags:
- hdi cameroon nigeria
- morphology
---

Here are some verb forms in Hdi and their English translations:

:::table{.border-hidden .padding-none .width-1200 .mb2}
::tr[:td[**yaka**] :td[*you (SG) give birth to it*] :td[**dɗadɗaka**] :td[*you (SG) fell*]]
::tr[:td[**ɗifaxən**] :td[*they hide it*] :td[**ksiksaxən**] :td[*they caught me*]]
::tr[:td[**kakati**] :td[*I help them*] :td[**ɓaɓadzaɓaɓadza**] :td[*they got spoiled*]]
::tr[:td[**daɗamu**] :td[*we fall*] :td[**ɗifaghaɗ ifa**] :td[*it hid you (SG)*]]
::tr[:td[**katakata**] :td[*it helped it*] :td[**kakatamukakata**] :td[*it helped us*]]
::tr[:td[**ɗiɗ ifaka**] :td[*you (SG) hide them*] :td[**yiyaxən**] :td[*they gave birth to me*]]
::tr[:td[**sana**] :td[*they know*] :td[**kasakuni**] :td[*you (PL) catch them*]]
::tr[:td[**ghali**] :td[*I steal it*] :td[**yaya**] :td[*it gives birth to them/it gave birth to it*]]
:::

**(a)** Translate into English:
:::table{.border-hidden .no1Count .no2Count .width-800 .m2n2}
::tr[:td[1. **ksaghaksi**] :td[:ans{.med}]]
::tr[:td[2. **kakataghunikakatamu**] :td[:ans{.med}]]
::tr[:td[3. **katakataxən**] :td[:ans{.med}]]
::tr[:td[4. **ɓadza**] :td[:ans{.med}]]
:::

**(b)** Translate into Hdi:

:::table{.border-hidden .no1Count .no2Count .width-800 .m2n2}
::tr[:td[5. *it caught you (PL)*] :td[:ans{.med}]]
::tr[:td[6. *we hide it*] :td[:ans{.med}]]
::tr[:td[7. *they fell*] :td[:ans{.med}]]
::tr[:td[8. *they gave birth to them*] :td[:ans{.med}]]
::tr[:td[9. *you (SG) stole them*] :td[:ans{.med}]]
::tr[:td[10. *I knew*] :td[:ans{.med}]]
:::

**Note.** Hdi belongs to the Chadic branch of the Afro-Asiatic family. It is spoken by approx. 29,000
people in Cameroon and Nigeria.
<br>x and gh are consonants that are pronounced using the same part of the tongue as k. ɓ,
ɗ, dz and y are consonants. ə is a vowel.
<br>The language has two tones, but they were not considered in this problem for the sake of
simplicity.
<br>SG = singular; PL = plural. :i[—Chih-Chun Wang]{.right}