---
title: Inuktitut
points: 20
tags: rosetta inuktitut canada canadian inuit eskimo aleut
---

The following are sentences in Inuktitut and their English translations:

:::ntable{fmt=1 .no2Count}
***Qingmivit takujaatit.*** & Your dog saw you.
***Inuuhuktuup iluaqhaiji qukiqtanga.*** & The boy shot the doctor.
***Aanniqtutit.*** & You hurt yourself.
***Iluaqhaijiup aarqijaatit.*** & The doctor cured you.
***Qingmiq iputujait.*** & You speared the dog.
***Angatkuq iluaqhaijimik aarqisijuq.*** & The shaman cured a doctor.
***Nanuq qaijuq.*** & The polar bear came.
***Iluaqhaijivit inuuhuktuit aarqijanga.*** & Your doctor cured your boy.
***Angunahuktiup amaruq iputujanga.*** & The hunter speared the wolf.
***Qingmiup ilinniaqtitsijiit aanniqtanga.*** & The dog hurt your teacher.
***Ukiakhaqtutit.*** & You fell.
***Angunahukti nanurmik qukiqsijuq.*** & The hunter shot a polar bear.
:::

**(a)** Translate into English:
:::ntable{fmt=1 .no2Count .cs13}
Amaruup angatkuit takujanga. & :ans{.med}
Nanuit inuuhukturmik aanniqsijuq. & :ans{.med}
Angunahuktiit aarqijuq. & :ans{.med}
Ilinniaqtitsiji qukiqtait. & :ans{.med}
Qaijutit. & :ans{.med}
Angunahuktimik aarqisijutit. & :ans{.med}
:::

**(b)** Translate into Inuktitut:

:::ntable{fmt=1 .no2Count .cs19}
The shaman hurt you. & :ans{.med}
The teacher saw the boy. & :ans{.med}
Your wolf fell. & :ans{.med}
You shot a dog. & :ans{.med}
Your dog hurt a teacher. & :ans{.med}
:::

**NB:** Inuktitut (Canadian Inuit) belongs to the Eskimo-Aleut family of languages. It is spoken by
approx. 35,000 people in the northern part of Canada.
<br>The letter ***r*** denotes a ‘Parisian’ *r* (pronounced far back in the mouth), and ***q*** stands for a
*k*-like sound made in the same place.
<br>A shaman is a priest, sorcerer and healer in some cultures. :i[—Bozhidar Bozhanov]